---
title: "Fact Sheet: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Accessibility of Medical Diagnostic Equipment"
title_es: "Fact Sheet: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Accessibility of Medical Diagnostic Equipment"
description: The Department of Justice published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on July 20, 2023 explaining how we propose updating the regulations for Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) to add more specific requirements about web and mobile application accessibility.  This fact sheet gives a plain language summary of the technical standards that state and local governments would have to follow to meet their existing obligations under Title II of the ADA.
sidenav: true
print: true
compact: true
notice_text: Proposed MDE NPRM
notice_text_es: Proposed MDE NPRM
notice_link: Read the fact sheet
notice_link_es: Read the fact sheet
subnavigation: true
tags:
- medical care
- title ii
---

The Department of Justice (Department) is publishing a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(NPRM) explaining how we propose updating the regulations for Title II of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) to lay out specific requirements for the accessibility of medical diagnostic
equipment (MDE).

This NPRM proposes specific technical standards that state and local governments would have
to follow to meet their existing obligations under Title II of the ADA for MDE accessibility. The
NPRM asks the public for comments about this proposal.

**Purpose of this fact sheet:** This fact sheet gives a plain language summary of the NPRM. The
summary is designed to provide introductory information about this proposal for people who
may not have a legal background. For all of the details about our proposal, please read the
NPRM.

{% details What is Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)? %}
Under [Title II of the ADA]({{'/topics/title-ii/' | relative_url}}), state and local governments’ services, programs, and activities
must be accessible to people with disabilities. In Title II, state and local governments are
also called public entities. Title II applies to all services, programs, or activities of state
and local governments. This includes health care services, programs, and activities that
state and local governments offer through or with the use of MDE.
{% enddetails %}

{% details What is a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM)? %}
Rulemaking is the process that federal agencies use to write regulations. A regulation
(also called a “rule”) is a set of requirements issued by a federal agency to implement
laws passed by Congress. When Congress passes laws, many details are often left to
federal agencies to flesh out in regulations. For example, when Congress passed the
ADA, it gave the Department the authority to issue regulations that explain the rights and
obligations under Titles II and III of the ADA.

An NPRM is a stage in the rulemaking process that happens before an agency adopts a
final regulation. It is like a first draft of a regulation. It lets the public know what the
agency is considering and provides an opportunity for feedback.

An NPRM is not a final regulation. So, this proposal is not an enforceable rule right now.
This NPRM has been published so that the public can provide us with feedback on our
proposal for the rule before we adopt a final rule.
{% enddetails %}

{% details What is medical diagnostic equipment? %}
Medical diagnostic equipment (MDE) is equipment used in, or in conjunction with,
medical settings by health care providers for diagnostic purposes. Examples of MDE
include:
- examination tables;
- examination chairs (including chairs used for eye examinations or procedures,
and dental examinations or procedures);
- weight scales;
- mammography equipment; and
- x-ray machines.
{% enddetails %}

{% details Who would be covered by this proposed rule? %}
Title II of the ADA applies to all public entities, including state and local governments,
and departments, agencies, special purpose districts, special district governments, and
other instrumentalities of state or local government. In this fact sheet, we call these
state and local governments. State and local governments that offer health care
services, programs, and activities through or with the use of MDE, such as public
hospitals and healthcare clinics, would be covered by this proposed rule. State and local
governments that contract with other entities to provide public services (like state
agencies that contract with non-profit organizations that run clinics on the state’s behalf)
also have an obligation to ensure that their contractors follow Title II.
{% enddetails %}

## Reasons for this Proposed Rule

People with disabilities continue to experience barriers to accessing medical care because
of inaccessible MDE. Barriers such as exam tables that are not height adjustable,
mammography machines that require a person to stand, and weight scales that do not
accommodate wheelchairs result in inequities and exclusion from basic health services for
individuals with disabilities, contributing to poor health outcomes. The proposed rule would
establish enforceable standards for accessible MDE, a significant and concrete step toward
addressing health disparities experienced by people with disabilities.

You can find more information about why the Department of Justice is proposing this rule in
the NPRM in the section called “Need for the Adoption of MDE Standards.”

## Highlights of the Proposals in the NPRM

Some of the specific proposed requirements found in the NPRM are highlighted below. Review
the full NPRM to get an understanding of the entire proposal.

Proposal: Adopt the U.S. Access Board’s MDE Standards as the technical standards for
accessible MDE.

- A technical standard says specifically what is required for something to be accessible.
For example, the existing ADA Standards for Accessible Design are technical standards
that say what is needed for a building to be physically accessible under the ADA, such
as how wide a door has to be or how steep a ramp can be.
- In 2017, the U.S. Access Board issued technical standards on the accessibility of MDE
in physicians’ offices, clinics, emergency rooms, hospitals, and other medical settings.
- This NPRM proposes to make the U.S. Access Board’s MDE Standards enforceable
under the ADA by adopting and incorporating them into the Department of Justice’s ADA
Title II regulation.

Proposal: Require state and local governments to ensure that their services, programs,
and activities that use MDE are accessible to individuals with disabilities.

- The rule would prohibit state and local governments that provide health care from
denying services that they would otherwise provide to a patient with a disability because
they lack accessible MDE.

- The rule would also prohibit a health care provider from requiring a patient with a
disability to bring someone along with them to help during an exam.

{% details Would state and local governments always have to comply with the MDE Standards? %}
Under the current ADA rules, state and local governments do not need to make changes
that would be a fundamental alteration or cause undue financial and administrative
burdens. They still would not need to do this under the proposed rule. For more
information about fundamental alteration and undue burden, see our State and Local
Governments page on ADA.gov.
{% enddetails %}

Proposal: Establish requirements for newly acquired MDE.

- The rule would require that all MDE that state and local governments purchase, lease, or
otherwise acquire after the rule goes into effect be accessible, unless and until they have
the required amount of accessible MDE.
- The requirements specifying how much accessible MDE state and local governments
must have are called “scoping requirements.”
- State and local governments may choose to acquire additional accessible MDE after
they satisfy the scoping requirements of the proposed rule.
Proposal: Establish requirements for existing MDE.
- In addition to establishing requirements for newly purchased, leased, or otherwise
acquired MDE, the rule would require that state and local governments address access
barriers resulting from a lack of existing accessible MDE. Examples of such access barriers could include exam tables that are not height adjustable or weight scales that do not accommodate wheelchairs.
- The proposed rule would not necessarily require state and local governments to make all
of their existing MDE accessible. Instead, it adopts an approach analogous to the
concept of program accessibility that already exists in the Department of Justice’s
existing regulation implementing Title II of the ADA.
- The rule would require that services, programs, or activities of state and local
governments, when viewed in their entirety, be readily accessible to and usable by
individuals with disabilities.
- State and local governments could comply with this requirement in many ways, such as
by providing services at another location, through home visits, or by acquiring accessible
MDE.

Proposal: Require qualified staff to be able to operate accessible MDE.
- The proposed rule would require state and local governments to ensure that their staff
are able to successfully operate accessible MDE, assist with transfers and positioning of
individuals with disabilities, and carry out the rule’s requirements for existing MDE.
- At all times when services are provided to the public, state and local governments would
be expected to have personnel who can operate accessible MDE in an appropriate and
timely manner.
- Often, the most effective way for state and local governments to ensure that their staff
can successfully operate accessible MDE is to provide staff training on the use of
accessible MDE.

Proposed Time to Comply with the Rule Once It Is Finalized
- Sixty days after the final rule is published, all MDE that state and local governments
purchase, lease, or otherwise acquire would be required to be accessible, unless and
until the entity has enough equipment to satisfy the rule’s scoping requirements. State
and local governments would also need to address access barriers resulting from a lack
of existing accessible MDE.
- Within two years after the publication of the final rule, state and local governments that
use exam tables would be required to have at least one exam table that meets the MDE
Standards.
- Within two years after the publication of the final rule, state and local governments that
use weight scales would be required to have at least one weight scale that meets the
MDE Standards.

## We Want Your Feedback
- This fact sheet gives a high-level summary of the NPRM. For more details about our
proposal, you should read the NPRM at [hyperlink to NPRM]
- We have also published an analysis of the costs and benefits of the proposed rule. This
is called a Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis (PRIA). You can read the PRIA on
ADA.gov.
- After you’ve reviewed the NPRM, we’d like to hear your feedback. You can submit
comments before [date] by going to [add link to Regulations.gov].
- If you need information in an alternative format, you can call the ADA Information Line at
800-514-0301 (voice) or 1-833-610-1264 (TTY).